
=== page 1 ===
Mathematical Physics
Individual Contest
To complete this assessment, answer at least 3 of the following 4 problems.
Problem 1
A non-relativistic, spinless, quantum particle of mass m moves in the Euclidean plane R2.
The particle is connected by ideal springs of elastic constant k to three fixed points in the plane
{p1, p2, p3} ⊂R2 which lay at the vertices of an equilateral triangle whose sides have length L.
(a) determine the Lie group of continuous symmetries of the system (the generators of its Lie
algebra should contain a maximal set of functional independent conserved quantities);
(b) compute the energy levels of the quantum system.
Problem 2
Let Γv be the Caley tree of valency v ≥3, i.e. the connected graph over infinitely-many nodes
without non-trivial closed paths (≡a tree) where each node is connected to other v nodes by a
single link. On each node i ∈Γv there is a Ising spin σi which takes the two values ±1 (spin up
and spin down) and the system has Hamiltonian (≡energy)
H = −J
X
⟨i,j⟩
σiσj,
J > 0
where the notation P
⟨i,j⟩means that the sum is over pairs of sites i, j ∈Γv connected by a link
(≡nearest neighbors sites).
Question. Use the free boundary condition. Is there a positive temperature Tc at which we have
a phase transition and yet the free energy F(T) is real analytic for 0 < T < ∞?
Problem 3
Orders-of-magnitude black hole physics.
Assuming black holes indeed evaporate via quantum effect as predicted by Hawking. Answer
the following questions to an order of magnitude. (Hint: for this problem, it is the most convenient
to work in the Planck units with c = G = ℏ= kB = 1 and convert the answer in the end using the
values of Planck length, mass, time, and temperature: lP ∼10−35 m, mP ∼10−8 kg, tP ∼10−43 s,
and TP ∼1032 K. Also, please feel free to ignore 2’s and π’s.)
1. If a black hole has mass M and its Hawking radiation has a black-body spectrum with
temperature proportional to its “surface gravity” (at, say, twice the radius of the horizon),
what is the temperature and total power of the Hawking radiation in Planck units? And
for a solar-mass black hole (∼1038 mP), what is the temperature and power in Kelvins and
Watts?
1

=== page 2 ===
Figure 1: Problem 4
2. What is the maximum mass of a black hole that can evaporate via Hawking radiation in the
lifetime of the Universe (10 billion years ∼1060tP)? Compare its temperature with that of
the cosmic microwave background (∼2.7K).
3. How much mass (in kilograms) does a black hole radiate away in its final second? Would
this be large or small in astronomical standard?
4. For a solar-mass black hole, what is the charge in conventional units (Coulombs) that would
have to be present to make Q = M in relativistic units? How does this compare to the total
charge of a solar mass of protons? (Hint: the charge of a proton is 10−19 Coulomb while its
mass is 10−19mP.)
Problem 4
A spherical container is partially filled with a slowly hardening epoxy resin (Figure 1). The
container is spinning with angular velocity ω1 about the O1 −O2 axis, which in turn is spinning
with angular velocity ω2 about the fixed O3 −O4 axis. Assuming ω1 ̸= ω2, find the final shape of
the hardened resin (use g for gravitational acceleration at Earth’s surface).
2
