
=== page 1 ===
Mathematical Physics: Individual Competition
(To complete this assignment, answer 3 out of the 4 problems.)
Problem 1
Consider Born-Infeld electrodynamics with Lagrangian L = b2

1 −
q
1 −E2−B2
b2

.
1. Find the electrostatic field of a point charge and show it has finite self-energy.
2. Derive the speed of light in a background field E0.
Problem 2
Consider a 1D Ising model with interactions decaying as J(r) ∝r−α where α ∈(1, 2).
1. Compute the approximate free energy for α = 3
2.
2. Find the critical temperature Tc(α)
Problem 3
Maxwell theory in various dimensions.
In any spacetime dimension d ≥2, one can define
a theory of a massless vector field Aµ with the Lagrangian
L = −1
4FµνF µν,
where the field strength is
Fµν = ∂µAν −∂νAµ.
1. Show that this Lagrangian is invariant under gauge transformations
Aµ →Aµ + ∂µf,
where f is an arbitrary real function.
2. Explain how to quantize this theory in the Coulomb gauge ∇· ⃗A = 0, and determine the
number of polarization states.
3. Show that, for d = 2, the only solution of the classical equations of motion is F12 being a
constant. If the spacetime is the Euclidean space R2, find a solution of the gauge field Aµ
that is rotational invariant with non-zero F12 = c. It might be convenient to work with polar
coordinates.
4. When the space-time is S2, glue together the solution for the previous part on the northern
and southern hemisphere via a gauge transformation along the equator. Show that
R
S2 F
has to be quantized for the solution to be consistent.
5. Prove that, for d = 3, this theory on R2,1 is equivalent to a theory of a free massless scalar.
(Hint: the scalar φ would satisfy F = ⋆dφ. Show that such φ exist and satisfy the equation
of motion □φ = 0. Furthermore, show that the equal-time commutation relation for φ is
the standard one.)
1

=== page 2 ===
Problem 4
General Lorentz Transformation:
1. Please write down the Lorentz transformation of the moving system (t′, x′, y′, z′) with relative
velocity v along the positive X-axis.
2. Now, could you use the result in part (a) to derive the General Lorentz Transformation when
the relative motion is along any −→
v direction. The result should be in the form of vectors −→
v
and −→r (not in the component form as x, y, z).
3. Now we consider the Lorentz transformation where the moving system has the relative
velocity v
−→
v = (vx, vy, 0)
Student A has tried to solve this problem by first taking the Lorentz transformation with
relative velocity (vx, 0, 0) and then another Lorentz transformation with relative velocity
(0, vy, 0). Student B has tried to solve this problem by first taking the Lorentz transformation
with relative velocity (0, vy, 0) and then another Lorentz transformation with relative velocity
(vx, 0, 0). Now the question is which student gives the right answer?
2
