
=== page 1 ===
S.-T. Yau College Student Mathematics Contests 2022
Geometry and Topology
Solve every problem.
Problem 1.
The topological space 𝑋is obtained by gluing two tetrahedra as illustrated by the figure. There
is a unique way to glue the faces of one tetrahedron to the other so that the arrows are matched. The resulting
complex has 2 tetrahedra, 4 triangles, 2 edges and 1 vertex.
Show that 𝑋can not have the homotopy type of a compact manifold without boundary.
Problem 2. Suppose (𝑀, ℎ) is a closed (i.e., compact without boundary) Riemannian manifold, and ℎis a metric
on 𝑀with sec(ℎ) ≤−1, where sec(ℎ) is the sectional curvature. Suppose Σ is a closed minimal surface with genus
𝑔in (𝑀, ℎ). Show that
Area(Σ) ≤4𝜋(𝑔−1).
Remark: A minimal surface is an immersed surface with constant mean curvature 0.
Problem 3. For any topological space 𝑋, the 𝑛-th symmetric product of 𝑋is the quotient of the Cartesian product
(𝑋)𝑛by the action of the symmetric group 𝑆𝑛, which permutes the factors in (𝑋)𝑛. This space is denoted by
SP𝑛(𝑋), and the topology is the natural quotient topology induced from (𝑋)𝑛.
Show that SP𝑛(𝐂𝐏1) is homeomorphic to 𝐂𝐏𝑛. Here 𝐂𝐏1 and 𝐂𝐏𝑛are equipped with the manifold topology.
Problem 4.
Let 𝑀be a complete noncompact Riemannian manifold. 𝑀is said to have the geodesic loops to
infinity property if for any [𝛼] ∈𝜋1(𝑀) and any compact subset 𝐾⊂𝑀, there is a geodesic loop 𝛽⊂𝑀\𝐾, such
that 𝛽is homotopic to 𝛼.
Show that if a complete noncompact Riemannian manifold 𝑀does not have the geodesic loops to infinity property,
then there is a line in the universal cover ˜
𝑀.
Remark: A line is a geodesic 𝛾∶(−∞, ∞) →𝑀such that dist (𝛾(𝑠), 𝛾(𝑡)) = |𝑠−𝑡|; a geodesic loop is a curve
𝛽∶[0, 1] →𝑀that is a geodesic and 𝛽(0) = 𝛽(1).
Problem 5. A topological space 𝑋is called an H-space if there exist 𝑒∈𝑋and 𝜇∶𝑋×𝑋→𝑋such that 𝜇(𝑒, 𝑒) = 𝑒
and the maps 𝑥→𝜇(𝑒, 𝑥) and 𝑥→𝜇(𝑥, 𝑒) are both homotopic to the identity map.
(a) Show that the fundamental group of an H-space is Abelian.
(b) Show that the sphere 𝑆2022 is not an H-space.
Historic Remark: “H” was suggested by Jean-Pierre Serre in recognition of the contributions in Topology by Heinz
Hopf.

=== page 2 ===
Problem 6. A hypersurface Σ ⊂𝐑𝐧+𝟏is called a shrinker if it satisfies the equation
𝐻(𝑥) = 1
2⟨𝑥, ⃗𝑛⟩.
Here 𝐻is the mean curvature, which is −⟨tr𝐴, ⃗𝑛⟩where 𝐴is the second fundamental form, 𝑥is the position vector,
and
⃗𝑛is outer unit normal vector.
(a) Show that 𝑆𝑛(√2𝑛), the sphere with radius √2𝑛, is a shrinker.
(b) Show that any compact shrinker without boundary must intersect with 𝑆𝑛(√2𝑛).
