
=== page 1 ===
Syllabus on Geometry and Topology 
 
Differential Geometry:  
 Basics of smooth manifolds: Inverse function theorem, implicit 
function theorem, submanifolds, Sard’s Theorem, embedding 
theorem, transversality, degree theory, integration on manifolds. 
 Basics of matrix Lie groups over R and C: The definitions of Gl(n), 
SU(n), SO(n), U(n), their manifold structures, Lie algebras, right 
and left invariant vector fields and differential forms, the 
exponential map. 
 Definition of real and complex vector bundles, tangent and 
cotangent bundles, basic operations on bundles such as dual bundle, 
tensor products, exterior products, direct sums, pull-back bundles. 
 Definition of differential forms, exterior product, exterior 
derivative, de Rham cohomology, behavior under pull-back. 
 Metrics on vector bundles. 
 Riemannian metrics, definition of a geodesic, existence and 
uniqueness of geodesics. 
 Definition of a principal Lie group bundle for matrix groups. 
 Associated vector bundles: Relation between principal bundles and 
vector bundles 

=== page 2 ===
 Definition of covariant derivative for a vector bundle and 
connection on a principal bundle. Relations between the two. 
 Definition of curvature, flat connections, parallel transport. 
 Definition of Levi-Civita connection and properties of the Riemann 
curvature tensor, manifolds of constant curvature. 
 Jacobi fields, second variation of geodesics 
 Manifolds of nonpositive curvature, manifolds of positive 
curvature 
References: V. Guillemin, A. Pollack, Differential topology; J. Milnor, 
Topology from the differentiable viewpoint; Cliff Taubes: Differential 
geometry: Bundles, Connections, Metrics and Curvature; John Lee: 
Introduction to Riemannian manifolds, second edition; S. Kobayashi and 
K. Nomizu: Foundations of Differential Geometry.  
 
Algebraic Topology:  
 Fundamental groups 
 Covering spaces 
 Higher homotopy groups 
 Fibrations and the long exact sequence of a fibration 
 Singular homology and cohomology 
 Relative homology 

=== page 3 ===
 CW complexes and the homology of CW complexes 
 Mayer-Vietoris sequence 
 Universal coefficient theorem 
 Kunneth formula 
 Poincare duality 
 Lefschetz fixed point formula 
 Hopf index theorem 
 Cech cohomology and de Rham cohomology.  
 Equivalence between singular, Cech and de Rham cohomology 
References: Alan Hatcher: Algebraic Topology; William Fulton: 
Algebraic Topology; Edwin Spanier: Algebraic Topology; M. Greenberg 
and J. Harper: Algebraic Topology: A First Course.  
